Welcome to the tutorial on an Introduction to Loss Data Analytics. 

My name is Yvonne Chueh. I am a professor at Central Washington University. Today, I am going to discuss some key points on the relevance of analytics. 

In this course and book, we are considering risk management and insurance techniques, so I want to emphasize the importance of insurance.

OVERHEAD 1 - Relevance of Insurance

Insurance is an important economic activity. A common method for measuring the extent of activity is to examine the insurance premiums. By this measure, insurance related activities comprise about 6.3% of world GDP, or gross domestic product. As one example, the country with the highest percentage is Japan, where insurance premiums accounted for 11.2% of GDP. As another example, in the US insurance actities accounted for 7.5% of GDP.

Without going into details, insurance is important for businesses and governments.

On an individual level, insurance touches the lives of most people. For example, almost everyone owning a home has insurance to protect themselves in the event of a fire, hailstorm, or some other calamitous event. As another example, almost every country requires some type of insurance for those driving a car.

OVERHEAD 2 - Analytics and Loss Data

Because insurance is a big business, it is not surprising that insurers employ analytics in the same manner as other large corporations. Virtually every large firm uses analytics extensively in sales and marketing, compensation
and productivity analysis, as well as financial forecasting. For example, in sales and marketing, analytics is used to:
☻ Predict customer behavior/needs
☻ Anticipate customer reactions to promotions/rate changes
☻ Manage acquisition costs such as online sales.

Firms use analytics extensively and it is highly likely that your role in a firm will involve analytics in some capacity.

So, we could introduce analytics from one of many perspectives, for example sales data or returns on investments. In this course, to keep a firm tie to the insurance industry, we focus on loss data, also known as insurance claims or insurance amounts.

OVERHEAD 3 - What is Analytics?

All firms use analytics, and insurers are no exception. Moreover, insurance is a data-driven industry, meaning that analytics is particularly important. Analytics is a key to deriving information from data.

But what precisely do we mean when say analytics? For contrast,  we might use
☻ "business intelligence". An old phrase used by those in operations research. Here, the focus is on processes of collecting data, often through databases and data warehouses. Or, we could use
☻ "business analytics", a description used by many modern business schools. It suggests utilizing tools and methods for statistical analyses of data. Another is
☻ "data science", used by many departments of statistics. This can encompass broader applications in many scientific domains.

For our purposes, we use the term "Analytics" to mean simply the process of using data to make decisions.

Specifically, this process involves gathering data, understanding models of uncertainty, making general inferences, and communicating results.

OVERHEAD 4 - Insurance Processes

We will be using insurance data to introduce analytics and so it is helpful to think about how this data is generated by insurance processes.

In a “micro” oriented view, we can think specifically about what happens to a contract at various stages of its existence. Here is a graph that symbolizes the timeline of a typical insurance policy.

It marks when a policy starts with a premium payment. Policies that we focus on, such as motor vehicle, are typically short-term contracts such as 6 months or a year but that also typically are renewed, resulting in another premium payment. Also marked on the graph are claim occurrences, and there may be more than one of them even within a single short-term period.


REVIEW

I hope that you found this overview of the relevance of analytics to be useful. In this section, we learned how to:

☻ Summarize the importance of insurance to consumers and the economy
☻ Describe analytics
☻ Identify data generating events associated with the timeline of a typical insurance contract

Thanks for watching.

