Welcome back to the tutorial on an Introduction to Loss Data Analytics. 

Hello, my name is Jed Frees, an emeritus professor with University of Wisconsin and Australian National University. In this video, I am going to discuss some key points on insurance company operations. 

OVERHEAD 1 - Insurance Company Operations

In the prior video, we discussed how claims data are likely to come from the lifetime of a policy. For analysts, it is also important to see how these data may be used in the firm operations.

From an Insurer’s viewpoint, to operate they need ways of bringing money in, paying it out, managing costs, and making sure that the insurer has enough money to meet obligations.

To make this happen, insurers aggregate detailed insurance processes into larger operational units. Here is a list of the five units commonly used within the insurance industry.

The first unit is about when the insurers initiates the policy. Here, analysts are involved in determining an appropriate price for a risk. Before the pricing, risks are grouped into appropriate categories that are similar to one another. "Adverse selection" is a common phenomena in insurance such as has a policyholder with a risky tendency, like a history of alcoholism, that the insurer is unaware of. Identifying adverse selection is an important component of pricing risks.

Pricing is also important at the renewal of insurance. Many personal insurance contracts, such as auto and homeowners, have relatively short terms such as 6 months or a year but are typically renewed. In this way, the effective length of the relationship between policyholder and insurer is much longer than the contract term and insurers want to retain customers deemed profitable.


OVERHEAD 2 - Insurance Company Operations

Pricing is most visibile to the public but an equally important part of insurance company operations is paying, and managing, claims. Insurers use analytics for early identification of costly claims so they can field the appropriate teams to pay, and in some cases, litigate responsibility for claims. They also use analytics to manage mischief, as fraud can raise costs for all parties.

Another unit of insurance operations is that of setting aside money for future obligations, a process known as reserving. Medical costs associated with some lines of business such as workers compensation can take many years to evolve. As another example, claims that associatied general obligations and liabilities of firms can also take many years to evolve due to extensive legal activities. These are two examples where analysts
☻ Predict future obligations
☻ Quantify the uncertainty of the estimates
☻ Match projections of obligations to income streams

The fifth and final operational unit regards determining the amount of money to be held to keep an insurer financial stability, the solvency, and the business units that can most productively use the money, capital allocation. Analysts in this domain work to decide appropriate level of necessary capital and to help manage external stakeholders’ expectations.

OVERHEAD 3 - Operations – Initiating Insurance

Analysts work extensively with pricing insurance at the initial contract. The public cares about pricing and so this is the focus of our introduction to insurance analytics.

But, setting the price of an insurance good can be a perplexing problem. We are bit more familiar with pricing in other sectors. For example, 
☻ In manufacturing, the cost of a good is (relatively) known, making pricing simpler.
☻ In other areas of financial services, market prices are available.

In many lines of insurance, start with an expected cost, add “margins” to account for the product’s riskiness, expenses incurred in servicing the product, and a profit/surplus allowance for the insurance company.

with this structure, getting the expected cost is a key ingredient. Especially in automobile and homeowners insurance, analytics to sharpen the market by making the calculation of the distribution more precise.

In this course, we build the foundations. Later, you will see that multivariate pricing strategies routinely employ advanced statistical methods such as generalized linear modeling.


OVERHEAD 4 - Big Data

Much of the gain in popularity in advancing analytics in the recent years is due to increased willingness to use data to make business decisions. Some call this movement "Big Data," referring to the increasing capacity and computational abilities of computers, availability of new and innovative sources of data, and advanced algorithms that can detect patterns in insurance activities that were previously unknown.

Traditionally, insurers used only information reported by policyholders on application forms, combined with selected external sources. For example, for decades auto insurers used police reports to price automobile insurance and medical exam results for life insurance.

Now, there is interest in collecting more information about policyholders. Some credit the interest in using more and different data to Progressive Insurance who used credit scores for pricing automobile insurance. From an analyst’s viewpoint, these additional sources have proven to be significant from predictive and economic viewpoints.

There are serious questions as what types of data are ethically permissible for insurers to use. For example, it has long been held that use of racial and ethnic information is illegal in most jurisdictions. The resulting debates are important.

Our position is not that analysts should dictate whether or not use of information should be restricted or prohibited. Rather, these considerations involve policy choices that should also involve legal and economic scholars, as well as government representatives and advocates for the industry and for consumers. Analysts can make important contributions to these discussions by quantifying the financial impact of policy alternatives.

REVIEW

I hope that you found this overview of insurance company operations to be useful. In this section, we learned how to:

☻ Describe five major operational areas of insurance companies.
☻ Identify the role of data and analytics opportunities within the pricing area.

Thanks for watching!

(963 Words)

































